# Sparse_matrix_multiplication

PROJECT REPORT


Title: Sparse Matrix Multiplication using 3 different algorithms 


Name: AMITH BHARADWAJ 
Roll no. MT2023503 
Name: DINESH K 
Roll no. MT2023537 

PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A sparse matrix is a matrix that contains a significant number of zero elements.Operations on sparse matrices can be computationally more efficient than on dense matrices. Algorithms designed for sparse matrices take advantage of the sparsity pattern to perform computations more quickly.Here, in this project we implement three different Sparse matrix multiplication algorithms.

Inner Product Algorithm: This algorithm is based on performing a dot product between a sparse row from the first matrix and a sparse column from the second matrix. The representation of the algorithm can be seen clearly in Fig.(a).

Outer Product Algorithm: In this particular Algorithm,partial sums for the entire output matrix are generated by performing an outer product between a sparse column of the first matrix and a sparse row of the second matrix. The resultant matrix is produced by summing up the obtained partial sum matrices.Fig.(b) represents the working of outer product algorithms.

Gustavson Algorithm (Row-wise product): In this approach , all the non-zero elements from a single row of matrix A are multiplied with the non-zero entries from the corresponding rows of matrix B, where the row index of matrix B is determined by the column index of the non-zero value from matrix A. The results are accumulated in the corresponding row of the output matrix.Fig.(c) depicts the working of this algorithm.




                                                     
Fig.(a) Inner Product          Fig.(b) Outer Product            Fig.(c) Gustavson 

IMPLEMENTATION

The project is implemented in Xilinx Vivado using the Verilog programming language, focusing on sparse matrix multiplication with matrix sizes set to 3x3. Input data for the module is sourced from two “.coe” files, which are loaded into Block RAMs. The information retrieved from these Block RAMs serves as input for matrices A and B. The outcome of the multiplication operation yields a 3x3 matrix.

Inner Product Algorithm

Resource Utilization report



2)  Post Implementation Simulation Waveform
In this post implementation simulation waveform, mem1_reg stores the values of input matrix A and mem2_reg stores the values of input matrix B. The resultant matrix after computing the matrix multiplication of A and B matrices according to the Inner product algorithm is stored in  the “InnerProduct” variable.
































3) Latency

Latency refers to the time delay between the initiation of an operation and the completion of that operation. The latency observed here is 2,000.1ns.





4) Design Timing Summary









Outer Product Algorithm

Resource Utilization report


2)  Post Implementation Simulation Waveform

In this post implementation simulation waveform, A_reg stores the values of input matrix A and B_reg stores the values of input matrix B. The resultant matrix after computing the matrix multiplication of A and B matrices according to the outer product algorithm is stored in  the “Result_OuterProduct” variable.




3) Latency

Latency refers to the time delay between the initiation of an operation and the completion of that operation. The latency observed here is 2,100.1ns.




4) Design Timing Summary









Gustavson Algorithm

Resource Utilization report


2)  Post Implementation Simulation Waveform

In this post implementation simulation waveform, A_reg stores the values of input matrix A and B_reg stores the values of input matrix B. The resultant matrix after computing the matrix multiplication of A and B matrices according to the gustavson algorithm is stored in  the “Result_Gustavson” variable.











3) Latency

Latency refers to the time delay between the initiation of an operation and the completion of that operation. The latency observed here is 2,100.1ns.



4) Design Timing Summary



Conclusion


The three algorithms, inner product , outer product and gustavson algorithms were understood and implemented on Xilinx vivado.The post implementation simulation was conducted to verify the working of it. The utilization summary obtained was analyzed to reconfirm the improvements from one algorithm to the other.
The verilog files and coe files of this project have been uploaded in the github repository given below.


### contributors


Reference Paper Link: https://doi.org/10.1109/MICRO50266.2020.00068
